In the year 1791, Woodward sailed from Boston in the ship Robert
Morris, Captain Hay, for the East Indies. On his arrival there he was
employed in making country voyages until the 20th of January, when he
sailed as chief-mate in an American ship from Batavia bound to
Manilla.

In passing through the straits of Macassar, they found the wind and
current both against them, and after beating up for six weeks they
fell short of provision. Captain Woodward and five seamen were sent to
purchase some from a vessel about four leagues distant. They were
without water, provisions, or compass,--having on board only an axe, a
boat hook, two penknives, a useless gun and forty dollars in cash.

They reached the ship at sunset, and were told by the captain that he
had no provision to spare as he was bound to China and was victualled
for only one month. He advised them to stay until morning, which they
did. But when morning dawned, their own ship was out of sight even
from the mast head, and with a fair wind for her to go through the
straits of Macassar. Being treated coolly by the captain, they agreed
with one voice to leave the ship in search of their own. On leaving
the vessel, the captain gave them twelve musket cartridges and a round
bottle of brandy, but neither water nor provision of any sort.

They rowed till twelve o'clock at night, in hopes of seeing their own
vessel, and then drawing near an island they thought it prudent to go
there to get some fresh water.--They landed and made a large fire in
hopes their ship might see it. But not being able to see any thing of
her in the morning and finding no water or provisions on the island,
they continued their course in the middle of the straits six days
longer, without going on shore or tasting of any thing but brandy.
They soon had the shore of Celebes in sight, where they determined to
go in search of provisions and then to proceed to Macassar.

As they approached the shore they saw two proas full of natives, who
immediately put themselves in a posture of defence. The sailors made
signs to them that they wanted provisions, but instead of giving it
the Malays began to brandish their cresses or steel daggers. Three of
the men jumped on board a proa to beg some Indian corn, and got three
or four small ears. The chief seemed quite friendly and agreed to sell
captain Woodward two cocoa nuts for a dollar, but as soon as he had
received the money, he immediately began to strip him in search of
more. Captain Woodward defended himself with a hatchet and ordered the
boat to be shoved off, the chief levelled a musket at him, but
fortunately it missed him.

They then stood off, went round a point of land and landed out of
sight of the proas, when they found a plenty of cocoa nut trees.
Captain Woodward while engaged in cutting them down, heard the man
whom he had left to take care of the boat, scream out in a most bitter
manner. He ran immediately to the beach where he saw his own boat off
at some distance full of Malays and the poor fellow who guarded it
lying on his back with his throat cut, and his body stabbed in several
places.

They now fled immediately to the mountains, and finding that they had
lost their boat, money, and most of their clothes, they concluded that
their only chance of escape was to get to Macassar by land. Being
afraid to travel in the day time they set out in the evening, taking a
star for their guide bearing south. But they soon lost sight of the
star and at daylight found themselves within a few rods of the place,
where they had set out. They had travelled on the side of a mountain,
and had gone quite round it instead of going straight over it. They
started again and travelled by the sea shore six nights successively,
living on berries and water found in the hollows of trees.

On the sixth they arrived at a bay where they saw a party of the Malays
fishing. Here Captain Woodward found some yellowish berries which were
to him quite palatable, but his men not liking them eat some of the
leaves. On the next day they concluded to make a raft and go to the
small island on which they first landed, thinking that they might be
taken off from it by some ship passing that way. But they were obliged
to abandon this project, for in the evening the men who had eaten the
leaves, were attacked with violent pains and were crying out in torture
during the whole night.--Although they got better towards evening yet
they were so weak and dejected that Captain Woodward was convinced that
they could not reach the island and asked them if they were willing to
surrender themselves to the Malays. On reflection they all thought this
the best course which they could take; and forthwith proceeded to the
bay where they had seen the Malays in the morning, in order at once
either to find friends or to meet their fate. At first they saw no one,
but Captain Woodward soon saw three of the natives approaching him; and
ordering his men to keep quiet, he advanced alone until he had come
within a short distance of them, where they stopped and drew out their
cresses or knives.--Captain Woodward fell on his knees and begged for
mercy. The Malays looked at him for about ten minutes with their knives
drawn, when one of them came towards him, knelt in the same manner and
offered both his hands. More natives now came up and stripped them of
their hats and handkerchiefs and even the buttons on their jackets,
which they took for money.

They were now taken to Travalla and carried to the court-house or
judgment hall, accompanied by a great concourse of people, including
women and children who made a circle at some distance from them. The
chief soon entered, looking as wild as a madman, carrying in his hand
a large drawn cress or knife, the blade of which was two feet and half
long and very bright. Captain Woodward approached so near to him as to
place the foot of the chief on his own head, as a token that he was
completely under his power and direction. The chief after holding a
short consultation, returned to his house and brought out five pieces
of betel nut, which he gave to the sailors as a token of friendship.

They were now permitted to rest until about eight o'clock when they
were carried to the Rajah's house, where they found a supper provided
for them of sago-bread and peas, but in all hardly enough for one man.
Their allowance afterwards was for each man a cocoa nut and an ear of
Indian corn at noon, and the same at night. In this manner they lived
about twenty days, but were not allowed to go out except to the water
to bathe. The natives soon began to relax their vigilance over them,
and in about four months, they were conveyed to the head Rajah of
Parlow. They had not been there long when the head Rajah sent to a
Dutch port called Priggia, which is at the head of a deep bay on the
east side of the island and which is under the care of a commandant
who was a Frenchman, and had been thirty years in the Dutch service.
He arrived at Parlow and sent for Capt. Woodward. He wished him to go
with him to Priggia where he resided, but Captain Woodward refused,
being apprehensive that he should be forced into the Dutch service.
The commandant then enquired where he intended to go. He answered to
Batavia or Macassar and thence to Bengal. He did not offer Captain
Woodward or his people either money, assistance, or clothes, but
seemed quite affronted.

The Rajah now gave him the liberty of returning to Travalla, taking
care, however, to send him in the night for fear that he should get
sight of Dungally, where there lived a Mahomedan priest called Juan
Hadgee. This priest had been at Travalla, and offered a ransom for
Captain Woodward and his men, but the natives were unwilling to take
it, and were fearful that their captives would try to escape to the
town where the priest lived. It happened however, that they were
becalmed off Dungally, so that Captain Woodward could observe its
situation. On arriving at Travalla, he attempted to escape alone by
water, but the canoe being leaky, he came very near losing his life.
But not discouraged, he started immediately for Dungally by land, and
reached it just as the day dawned.

Juan Hadgee received him kindly and provided him with food and
clothing. In the course of three days the chief of Travalla learning
that he had gone to Dungally, sent after him, but the old priest and
the Rajah of Dungally refused to let him go. They told him that in the
course of three months they would convey him to Batavia or Macassar,
and also desired him to send for the four men he had left at
Travalla.--This he did by means of a letter which he wrote with a pen
of bamboo, and sent by the captain of a proa, who delivered it
secretly. The men made their escape from Parlow at the time of a
feast, early in the evening, and arrived at Dungally at twelve o'clock
the next day. They were received with great rejoicing by the natives,
who immediately brought them plenty of victuals. And this fortunate
circumstance revived their hopes of reaching some European settlement,
after many narrow escapes and difficulties.

Juan Hadgee now informed Capt. Woodward that he should set off in
about two months, but that he must first make a short voyage for
provisions, which he did, leaving Captain Woodward in his house with
his wife and two servants.

They soon began to suffer exceedingly for the want of provisions, so
that the natives were obliged to convey them up the country, there to
be supplied by some of the same tribe, who regularly went from the
village into the country at a certain season to cultivate rice and
Indian corn. But the Rajah of Parlow making war on the Rajah of
Dungally, because the latter would not deliver them up, they were soon
brought back to Dungally. There was but one engagement, and then the
men of Parlow were beaten and driven back to their own town.

Provisions again growing scarce, Juan Hadgee was bound for another
port called Sawyah, situated about two degrees north of the line. He
gave Captain Woodward permission to accompany him, provided the Rajah
was willing, but the latter refused, saying that he must stay there
and keep guard. Captain Woodward now mustered his men, and taking
their guns they went to the house of the Rajah and told him they would
stand guard no longer for they wished to go to Macassar. He
immediately replied that they should not. Being determined not to live
longer in this manner, and finding no other means of escaping, Captain
Woodward came to the resolution of stealing a canoe, to which all the
men agreed. They were lucky enough to obtain one and seemed in a fair
way to make their escape, but just as they were getting into it they
were surrounded by about twenty natives and carried before the Rajah,
who ordered them to account for their conduct. They told him that they
could get nothing to eat, and were determined to quit the place on the
first opportunity that offered. Nothing of consequence resulted from
this.--Knowing the language and people they had now become fearless of
danger.

The Rajah refusing to let them go with Juan Hadgee they determined to
run away with him, which they were enabled to do, as the old man set
out at twelve o'clock at night, and there happened luckily to be a
canoe on the beach near his own.--This they took and followed him as
well as they could, but they soon parted from him, and in the morning
discovered a proa close by them filled with Malays. They told them
that they were bound with the old man to Sawyah. The Malays took them
at their word and carried them there instead of to Dungally, which was
a lucky escape to them for that time.--Whilst residing at Sawyah the
old priest carried Captain Woodward to an island in the bay of Sawyah,
which he granted to him, and in compliment called it Steersman's
Island, steersman being the appellation by which Captain Woodward was
distinguished by the natives. After staying some time in Sawyah and
making sago, which they bartered for fish and cocoa-nuts, they left
the place and proceeded to Dumpolis, a little to the southward of
Sawyah. Juan Hadgee soon left the place for Tomboo about a day's sail
south, where he had business. Here Captain Woodward and his men also
followed him. The old priest was willing to assist them to escape from
here, but was evidently unable to do it. Tomboo being under the
direction of the Rajah of Dungally.

Fortunately they succeeded in stealing a canoe in the night, and once
more shoving off, they directed their course to a small island in the
bay, where they landed at daybreak. Not being able to find water here
as they expected, they landed at another point of land, which they
knew to be uninhabited.--Having obtained water and repaired their
canoe, they directed their course to Macassar, which was then about
five degrees to the southward. After coasting along the island for the
space of eight days, during which time they were twice very nearly
taken by the Malays, they arrived at a part of the island of Celebes,
which was very thickly inhabited.

They passed many towns and saw many proas within the harbors. Having
observed a retired place, they landed to procure some fresh water, but
they had hardly got a draught each, when two canoes were seen coming
to the very place where they were. They immediately shoved off and
kept on their course all day. Just as the sun went down they
discovered two canoes not far from them fishing. As soon as the
natives saw them they made the best of their way to the shore. Captain
Woodward wished to inquire the distance to Macassar, but not being
able to stop them he made for one of two canoes which he saw at a
distance lying at anchor. Being told that the captain was below and
asleep he went down and awakened him. He came on deck with three or
four men all armed with spears, and inquired where they were going.
Captain Woodward told him to Macassar and inquired of him the distance
to that place. He answered that it would take a month and a day to
reach it. Captain Woodward told him it was not true and made the best
of his way off. The Malays however made chase, but Captain Woodward
and his men by putting out to sea and making great exertion, soon lost
sight of them and were able again to stand in towards the land.

At daylight they discovered a number of fishing canoes, two of which
made towards them. They let them come alongside as there was only one
man in each. One of them came on board and Captain Woodward put the
same question to him respecting Macassar. He first said it would take
thirty days to reach there and asked them to go on shore and see the
Rajah. But they declined doing this, and he afterwards acknowledged
that a proa could go there in two days.

They then left the canoe and sailed along the coast. At evening they
perceived a proa full of Malay men set off from the shore. It was soon
along side, and four of them jumping into the boat nearly upset her,
and thus Captain Woodward and his men were again prisoners of the
Malays. They were carried to a town called Pamboon and then conducted
to the Rajah's house. The Rajah demanded of them whence they came and
whither they were going. Captain Woodward answered the same as before;
he also told him that they must go immediately, and must not be
stopped. They had now become so familiar with dangers and with
captures, and were also so much nearer Macassar, than they could have
expected after so many narrow escapes, that they became more and more
desperate and confident, from the persuasion that they should at last
reach their destined port.

In the morning Captain Woodward again waited on the Rajah, and begged
to be sent to Macassar; telling him that the Governor had sent for
them, who would stop all his proas at Macassar if he detained them.
After thinking on it a short time, he called the captain of a proa,
and delivered the prisoners to him, telling him to carry them to
Macassar, and if he could get anything for them to take it, but if not
to let them go. The proa not being ready they stayed in the canoe
three days, quite overcome by their many hardships and fatigues.
Captain Woodward having had no shirt, the sun had burnt his shoulder
so as to lay it quite bare and produce a bad sore. Here he caught
cold, and was attacked with a violent fever, so that by the time the
proa was ready to sail he was unable to stand. He was carried and laid
on the deck without a mat or any kind of clothing. The cold nights and
frequent showers of rain would without doubt have killed him, had he
not been kept alive by the hopes of reaching Macassar, the thoughts of
which kept up all their spirits.

They landed at Macassar on the 15th of June 1795, after a voyage of
about nineteen days from Tomboo, and after having been two years and
five months in captivity; the reckoning which Captain Woodward kept
during that time, being wrong only one day.




AN OCCURRENCE AT SEA.


In June, 1824, I embarked at Liverpool on board the Vibelia transport
with the head-quarters of my regiment, which was proceeding to
Halifax, Nova Scotia. Our passage across the Atlantic was smooth,
though long and tedious. After passing over the great bank of
Newfoundland, catching large quantities of codfish and halibut, and
encountering the usual fogs, we were one morning, about the end of
July, completely becalmed. All who have performed a voyage, know the
feeling of listlessness to which a landsman abandons himself during a
calm. The morning was slowly passed in looking for appearances of a
breeze--whistling for a wind, and the other idle pursuits usual on
such occasions. Towards noon, a sailor from aloft pointed out to our
observation a vessel at a distance, also, of course, becalmed. All
eyes and glasses were immediately directed towards her, but she was
too far off for the most experienced to determine whether she was
English or foreign, man-of-war or merchantman. After a time it
occurred to me, that it was a favorable opportunity for breaking in
upon the monotony of the day. My influence with our captain obtained
permission for the small cutter to be lowered, but he would not allow
a single seaman to leave the ship. I therefore became coxswain of the
boat, and, accompanied by four of my brother officers as rowers, we
pushed off, determined to pay a visit to the strange sail. To our
landsmen's eyes and judgment, she had appeared to be about four miles
from us, but we found ourselves very much out in our calculation--it
was more than double that distance. The rowers, however, pulled on
bravely--we neared the stranger, making her out to be a large American
merchantman, and as he was approached, we observed a number of persons
on deck reconnoitring us through glasses. At length we were alongside,
and I passed on board, followed by three of my companions, one
remaining in charge of the boat. On reaching the deck, we found it
crowded with men, who seemed to regard us with wondering looks. I
stepped forward and was received by the Captain, who acquainted me
that his vessel was the American ship Cadmus, on her passage from
Havre-de-grace to New York, with General the Marquis de Lafayette and
suite as passengers. A noble, venerable looking veteran advanced from
the poop towards us, and offered his greetings with the courtesy of
the old French school. He was Lafayette. My explanation of who we
were, and the motive of our visit, appeared to excite his surprise.
That five officers of the land service, unaccompanied by a single
sailor, should leave their vessel on the open ocean, and from mere
curiosity, visit a strange sail at such a distance, was, he declared,
most extraordinary. He said they had observed our ship early in the
morning--had been occupied (like ourselves) in vain endeavors to make
us out--had remarked an object, a mere speck upon the sea, leave the
vessel and move towards them, and when at length it was made out to be
a boat, the probable cause of such a circumstance had given rise to
many surmises. I told him in mitigation of what he deemed our
rashness, that we were, as a nation, so essentially maritime, that
every man in England was more or less a sailor. At all events, I
ventured to add if we had encountered some little risk, we had been
amply repaid in seeing a man so celebrated, and of whom we had all
heard and read. Our comrade being relieved by an American sailor in
the care of the boat, we accepted the General's offer of refreshment,
proceeded to the cabin, and passed a most agreeable hour. The fast
approach of evening and appearances of a breeze springing up induced
us to take leave. We separated from the old chief, not as the
acquaintance of an hour, but with all the warmth--the grasp and
pressure of hand--of old friends. As I parted from him at the gangway,
he mentioned having caused a case of claret to be lowered into our
boat, which he begged us to present to our Colonel and the other
officers of our mess. We pulled cheerily back, but it was not until
long after dark that we reached the 'Vibelia,' and which we perhaps
could not have accomplished, but for their having exhibited blue
lights every few minutes to point out her position. We found our
comrades had been in great alarm for our safety. Various had been the
surmises. That we had boarded a pirate, and been sacrificed, or made
prisoners, was most prevalent, and a breeze was anxiously prayed for,
that they might bear down, and release or revenge us. Half an hour
after we returned to our ship, a light wind sprang up, which very
shortly freshened into a gale, so that in the morning we had
completely lost sight of the 'Cadmus.'




ACCOUNT OF THE LOSS OF HIS MAJESTY'S SHIP PHOENIX.


The Phoenix of 44 guns, Capt. Sir Hyde Parker was lost in a hurricane,
off Cuba, in the West Indies, in the year 1780. The same hurricane
destroyed the Thunderer, 74; Stirling Castle, 64; La Blanche, 42;
Laurel, 28; Andromeda, 28; Deas Castle, 24; Scarborough, 20; Beaver's
Prize, 16; Barbadoes, 14; Cameleon, 14; Endeavour, 14; and Victor, 10
guns. Lieut. Archer was first-lieutenant of the Phoenix at the time
she was lost. His narrative in a letter to his mother, contains a most
correct and animated account of one of the most awful events in the
service. It is so simple and natural as to make the reader feel
himself as on board the Phoenix. Every circumstance is detailed with
feeling, and powerful appeals are continually made to the heart. It
must likewise afford considerable pleasure to observe the devout
spirit of a seaman frequently bursting forth, and imparting sublimity
to the relation.

                                    At Sea, June 30, 1781.

    MY DEAR MOTHER,

I am now going to give you an account of our last cruise in the
Phoenix; and must premise, that should any one see it besides
yourself, they must put this construction on it--that it was
originally intended for the eyes of a mother, and a mother only--as,
upon that supposition, my feelings may be tolerated. You will also
meet with a number of sea-terms, which, if you don't understand, why,
I cannot help you, as I am unable to give a sea description in any
other words.

To begin then:--On the 2d of August, 1780, we weighed and sailed for
Port Royal, bound for Pensacola, having two store-ships under convoy,
and to see safe in; then cruise off the Havana, and in the gulf of
Mexico, for six weeks. In a few days we made the two sandy islands,
that look as if they had just risen out of the sea, or fallen from the
sky; inhabited, nevertheless, by upwards of three hundred English, who
get their bread by catching turtle and parrots, and raising
vegetables, which they exchange with ships that pass, for clothing and
a few of the luxuries of life, as rum, &c.

About the 12th we arrived at Pensacola, without any thing remarkable
happening except our catching a vast quantity of fish, sharks,
dolphins, and bonettos. On the 13th sailed singly, and on the 14th had
a very heavy gale of wind at north, right off the land, so that we
soon left the sweet place, Pensacola, at a distance astern. We then
looked into the Havana, saw a number of ships there, and knowing that
some of them were bound round the bay, we cruised in the track: a
fortnight, however, passed, and not a single ship hove in sight to
cheer our spirits. We then took a turn or two round the gulf, but not
near enough to be seen from the shore. Vera Cruz we expected would
have made us happy, but the same luck still continued; day followed
day, and no sail. The dollar bag began to grow a little bulky, for
every one had lost two or three times, and no one had won: this was a
small gambling party entered into by Sir Hyde and ourselves; every one
put a dollar into a bag, and fixed on a day when we should see a
sail, but no two persons were to name the same day, and whoever
guessed right first was to have the bag.

Being now tired of our situation, and glad the cruise was almost out,
for we found the navigation very dangerous, owing to unaccountable
currents; we shaped our course for Cape Antonio. The next day the man
at the mast head, at about one o'clock in the afternoon, called out:
"A sail upon the weather bow! Ha! Ha! Mr. Spaniard, I think we have
you at last. Turn out all hands! make sail! All hands give chase!"
There was scarcely any occasion for this order, for the sound of a
sail being in sight flew like wild fire through the ship and every
sail was set in an instant almost before the orders were given. A
lieutenant at the mast head, with a spy glass, "What is she?" "A large
ship studding athwart right before the wind. P-o-r-t! Keep her away!
set the studding sails ready!" Up comes the little doctor, rubbing his
hands; "Ha! ha! I have won the bag." "The devil take you and the bag;
look, what 's ahead will fill all our bags." Mast head again: "Two
more sail on the larboard beam!" "Archer, go up, and see what you can
make of them." "Upon deck there; I see a whole fleet of twenty sail
coming right before the wind." "Confound the luck of it, this is some
convoy or other, but we must try if we can pick some of them out."
"Haul down the studding-sails! Luff! bring her to the wind! Let us see
what we can make of them."

About five we got pretty near them, and found them to be twenty-six
sail of Spanish merchantmen, under convoy of three line of battle
ships, one of which chased us; but when she found we were playing with
her (for the old Phoenix had heels) she left chase, and joined the
convoy; which they drew up into a lump, and placed themselves at the
outside; but we still kept smelling about till after dark. O, for the
Hector, the Albion, and a frigate, and we should take the whole fleet
and convoy, worth some millions! About eight o'clock perceived three
sail at some distance from the fleet; dashed in between them, and gave
chase, and were happy to find they steered from the fleet. About
twelve came up with a large ship of twenty-six guns. "Archer, every
man to his quarters! run the lower deck guns out, and light the ship
up; show this fellow our force; it may prevent his firing into us and
killing a man or two." No sooner said than done. "Hoa, the ship ahoy,
lower all your sails down, and bring to instantly, or I'll sink you."
Clatter, clatter, went the blocks, and away flew all their sails in
proper confusion. "What ship is that?" "The Polly." "Whence came
you?" "From Jamaica." "Where are you bound?" "To New York." "What ship
is that?" "The Phoenix." Huzza, three times by the whole ship's
company. An old grum fellow of a sailor standing close by me: "O, d--m
your three cheers, we took you to be something else." Upon examination
we found it to be as he reported, and that they had fallen in with the
Spanish fleet that morning, and were chased the whole day, and that
nothing saved them but our stepping in between; for the Spaniards took
us for three consorts, and the Polly took the Phoenix for a Spanish
frigate, till we hailed them. The other vessel in company was likewise
bound to New York. Thus was I, from being worth thousands in idea,
reduced to the old 4s. 6d. a day again: for the little doctor made the
most prize money of us all that day, by winning the bag, which
contained between thirty and forty dollars; but this is nothing to
what we sailors sometimes undergo.

After parting company, we steered south-south-east, to go round
Antonio, and so to Jamaica, (our cruise being out) with our fingers
in our mouths, and all of us as green as you please. It happened to
be my middle watch, and about three o'clock, when a man upon the
forecastle bawls out: "Breakers ahead, and land upon the lee-bow;" I
looked out, and it was so sure enough. "Ready about! put the helm
down! Helm a lee!" Sir Hyde hearing me put the ship about, jumped
upon deck. "Archer, what 's the matter? you are putting the ship
about without my orders!" "Sir, 'tis time to go about! the ship is
almost ashore, there 's the land." "Good God so it is! Will the ship
stay?" "Yes, Sir, I believe she will, if we don't make any confusion;
she's all aback--forward now?"--"Well," says he, "work the ship, I
will not speak a single word." The ship stayed very well. "Then,
heave the lead! see what water we have!" "Three fathom." "Keep the
ship away, west-north-west."--"By the mark three." "This won't do,
Archer." "No, Sir, we had better haul more to the northward; we came
south-south-east, and had better steer north-north-west." "Steady,
and a quarter three." "This may do, as we deepen a little." "By the
deep four." "Very well, my lad, heave quick." "Five Fathom." "That 's
a fine fellow! another cast nimbly." "Quarter less eight." "That will
do, come, we shall get clear by and by."--"Mark under water five."
"What 's that?" "Only five fathom, Sir." "Turn all hands up, bring
the ship to an anchor, boy!" "Are the anchors clear!" "In a moment,
Sir." "All clear!" "What water have you in the chains now!" "Eight,
half nine." "Keep fast the anchors till I call you." "Ay, ay, Sir,
all fast!" "I have no ground with this line." "How many fathoms have
you out? pass along the deep-sea line!" "Ay, ay, Sir." "Come are you
all ready?" "All ready, Sir." "Heave away, watch! watch! bear away,
veer away, no ground Sir, with a hundred fathom." "That 's clever,
come, Madam Phoenix, there is another squeak in you yet--all down but
the watch; secure the anchors again; heave the main-top-sail to the
mast; luff, and bring her to the wind!"

I told you, Madam, you should have a little sea-jargon: if you can
understand half of what is already said, I wonder at it, though it is
nothing to what is to come yet, when the old hurricane begins. As soon
as the ship was a little to rights, and all quiet again, Sir Hyde came
to me in the most friendly manner, the tears almost starting from his
eyes--"Archer, we ought all, to be much obliged to you for the safety
of the ship, and perhaps of ourselves. I am particularly so; nothing
but that instantaneous presence of mind and calmness saved her;
another ship's length and we should have been fast on shore; had you
been the least diffident, or made the least confusion, so as to make
the ship baulk in her stays, she must have been inevitably lost."
"Sir, you are very good, but I have done nothing that I suppose any
body else would not have done, in the same situation. I did not turn
all the hands up, knowing the watch able to work the ship; besides,
had it spread immediately about the ship, that she was almost ashore,
it might have created a confusion that was better avoided." "Well,"
says he, "'t is well indeed."

At daylight we found that the current had set us between the Collarado
rocks and Cape Antonio, and that we could not have got out any other
way than we did; there was a chance, but Providence is the best pilot.
We had sunset that day twenty leagues to the south-east of our
reckoning by the current.

After getting clear of this scrape, we thought ourselves fortunate,
and made sail for Jamaica, but misfortune seemed to follow misfortune.
The next night, my watch upon deck too, we were overtaken by a squall,
like a hurricane while it lasted; for though I saw it coming, and
prepared for it, yet, when it took the ship, it roared, and laid her
down so, that I thought she would never get up again. However, by
keeping her away, and clewing up every thing, she righted. The
remainder of the night we had very heavy squalls, and in the morning
found the mainmast sprung half the way through: one hundred and
twenty-three leagues to the leeward of Jamaica, the hurricane months
coming on, the head of the mainmast almost off, and at short
allowance; well, we must make the best of it. The mainmast was well
fished, but we were obliged to be very tender of carrying sail.

Nothing remarkable happened for ten days afterwards, when we chased a
Yankee man of war for six hours, but could not get near enough to her
before it was dark, to keep sight of her; so that we lost her because
unable to carry any sail on the mainmast. In about twelve days more
made the island of Jamaica, having weathered all the squalls, and put
into Montego Bay for water; so that we had a strong party for kicking
up a dust on shore, having found three men of war lying there.
Dancing, &c. &c. till two o'clock every morning; little thinking what
was to happen in four days' time: for out of the four men of war that
were there, not one was in being at the end of that time, and not a
soul alive but those left of our crew. Many of the houses, where we
had been so merry, were so completely destroyed, that scarcely a
vestige remained to mark where they stood. Thy works are wonderful, O
God! praised be thy holy Name!

September the 30th weighed; bound for Port Royal, round the eastward
of the island; the Bardadoes and Victor had sailed the day before, and
the Scarborough was to sail the next. Moderate weather until October
the 2d. Spoke to the Barbadoes off Port Antonio in the evening. At
eleven at night it began to snuffle, with a monstrous heavy appearance
from the eastward. Close reefed the top-sails. Sir Hyde sent for me:
"What sort of weather have we, Archer!" "It blows a little, and has a
very ugly look: if in any other quarter but this, I should say we were
going to have a gale of wind." "Ay, it looks so very often here when
there is no wind at all; however, don't hoist the top-sails till it
clears a little, there is no trusting any country." At twelve I was
relieved; the weather had the same rough look: however, they made sail
upon her, but had a very dirty night. At eight in the morning I came
up again, found it blowing hard from the east-north-east, with
close-reefed top-sails upon the ship, and heavy squalls at times. Sir
Hyde came upon deck: "Well, Archer, what do you think of it?" "O, Sir,
't is only a touch of the times, we shall have an observation at
twelve o'clock; the clouds are beginning to break; it will clear up at
noon, or else--blow very hard afterwards." "I wish it would clear up,
but I doubt it much. I was once in a hurricane in the East Indies, and
the beginning of it had much the same appearance as this. So take in
the top-sails, we have plenty of sea-room."

At twelve, the gale still increasing, wore ship, to keep as near
mid-channel between Jamaica and Cuba, as possible; at one the gale
increasing still; at two, harder yet, it still blows harder! Reefed
the courses, and furled them; brought to under a foul mizen stay-sail,
head to the northward. In the evening no sign of the weather taking
off, but every appearance of the storm increasing, prepared for a
proper gale of wind; secured all the sails with spare gaskets; good
rolling tackles upon the yards; squared the booms; saw the boats all
made fast; new lashed the guns; double breeched the lower deckers; saw
that the carpenters had the tarpawlings and battens all ready for
hatchways; got the top-gallant-mast down upon the deck; jib-boom and
sprit-sail-yard fore and aft; in fact every thing we could think of to
make a snug ship.

The poor devils of birds now began to find the uproar in the elements,
for numbers, both of sea and land kinds, came on board of us. I took
notice of some, which happening to be to leeward, turned to windward,
like a ship, tack and tack; for they could not fly against it. When
they came over the ship they dashed themselves down upon the deck,
without attempting to stir till picked up, and when let go again, they
would not leave the ship, but endeavoured to hide themselves from the
wind.

At eight o'clock a hurricane; the sea roaring, but the wind still
steady to a point; did not ship a spoonful of water. However, got the
hatchways all secured, expecting what would be the consequence, should
the wind shift; placed the carpenters by the mainmast, with broad
axes, knowing, from experience, that at the moment you may want to cut
it away to save the ship, an axe may not be found. Went to supper:
bread, cheese, and porter. The purser frightened out of his wits about
his bread bags; the two marine officers as white as sheets, not
understanding the ship's working so much, and the noise of the lower
deck guns; which, by this time, made a pretty screeching to people not
used to it; it seemed as if the whole ship's side was going at each
roll. Wooden, our carpenter, was all this time smoking his pipe and
laughing at the doctor; the second lieutenant upon deck, and the third
in his hammock.

At ten o'clock I thought to get a little sleep; came to look into my
cot; it was full of water; for every seam, by the straining of the
ship, had began to leak. Stretched myself, therefore, upon deck
between two chests, and left orders to be called, should the least
thing happen. At twelve a midshipman came to me: "Mr. Archer, we are
just going to wear ship, Sir!" "O, very well, I'll be up directly,
what sort of weather have you got?" "It blows a hurricane." Went upon
deck, found Sir Hyde there. "It blows damned hard Archer." "It does
indeed, Sir." "I don't know that I ever remember its blowing so hard
before, but the ship makes a good weather of it upon this tack as she
bows the sea; but we must wear her, as the wind has shifted to the
south-east, and we were drawing right upon Cuba; so do you go forward,
and have some hands stand by; loose the lee yard-arm of the fore-sail,
and when she is right before the wind, whip the clue-garnet close up,
and roll up the sail." "Sir! there is no canvass can stand against
this a moment; if we attempt to loose him he will fly into ribands in
an instant, and we may lose three or four of our people; she'll wear
by manning the fore shrouds." "No, I don't think she will." "I'll
answer for it, Sir; I have seen it tried several times on the coast of
America with success." "Well, try it; if she does not wear, we can
only loose the fore-sail afterwards." This was a great condescension
from such a man as Sir Hyde. However, by sending about two hundred
people into the fore-rigging, after a hard struggle, she wore; found
she did not make so good weather on this tack as on the other; for as
the sea began to run across, she had not time to rise from one sea
before another lashed against her. Began to think we should lose our
masts, as the ship lay very much along, by the pressure of the wind
constantly upon the yards and masts alone: for the poor
mizen-stay-sail had gone in shreds long before, and the sails began to
fly from the yards through the gaskets into coach whips. My God! to
think that the wind could have such force!

Sir Hyde now sent me to see what was the matter between decks, as
there was a good deal of noise. As soon as I was below, one of the
Marine officers calls out: "Good God Mr. Archer, we are sinking, the
water is up to the bottom of my cot." "Pooh, pooh! as long as it is
not over your mouth, you are well off; what the devil do you make this
noise for?" I found there was some water between decks, but nothing to
be alarmed at; scuttled the deck, and let it run into the well--found
she made a good deal of water through the sides and decks; turned the
watch below to the pumps, though only two feet of water in the well;
but expected to be kept constantly at work now, as the ship labored
much, with scarcely a part of her above water but the quarter-deck,
and that but seldom "Come, pump away, my boys. Carpenters, get the
weather chain-pump rigged." "All ready, Sir." "Then man it and keep
both pumps going."

At two o'clock the chain-pump was choked; set the carpenters at work
to clear it; the two head pumps at work upon deck; the ship gained on
us while our chain-pumps were idle; in a quarter of an hour they were
at work again, and we began to gain upon her. While I was standing at
the pumps, cheering the people, the carpenter's mate came running to
me with a face as long as my arm: "O, Sir! the ship has sprang a leak
in the gunner's room." "Go, then, and tell the carpenter to come to
me, but don't speak a word to any one else." "Mr. Goodinoh, I am told
there is a leak in the gunner's room; go and see what is the matter,
but don't alarm any body, and come and make your report privately to
me." In a short time he returned: "Sir, there 's nothing there, 'tis
only the water washing up between the timbers that this booby has
taken for a leak." "O, very well; go upon deck and see if you can keep
any of the water from washing down below." "Sir, I have had four
people constantly keeping the hatchways secure, but there is such a
weight of water upon the deck that nobody can stand it when the ship
rolls." The gunner soon afterwards came to me: "Mr. Archer, I should
be glad if you would step this way into the magazine for a moment:" I
thought some damned thing was the matter, and ran directly: "Well,
what is the matter here?" "The ground-tier of powder is spoiled, and I
want to show you that it is not out of carelessness in stowing it, for
no powder in the world could be better stowed. Now, Sir, what am I to
do? if you don't speak to Sir Hyde, he will be angry with me." I could
not forbear smiling to see how easy he took the danger of the ship,
and said to him: "Let us shake off this gale of wind first, and talk
of the damaged powder afterwards."

At four we had gained upon the ship a little, and I went upon deck, it
being my watch. The second lieutenant relieved me at the pumps. Who
can attempt to describe the appearance of things upon deck? If I was
to write for ever I could not give you an idea of it--a total darkness
all above, the sea on fire, running as it were in Alps, or Peaks of
Teneriffe; (mountains are too common an idea); the wind roaring louder
than thunder, (absolutely no flight of imagination), the whole made
more terrible, if possible, by a very uncommon kind of blue lightning;
the poor ship very much pressed, yet doing what she could, shaking her
sides, and groaning at every stroke. Sir Hyde upon deck lashed to
windward! I soon lashed myself alongside of him, and told him the
situation of things below, saying the ship did not make more water
than might be expected in such weather, and that I was only afraid of
a gun breaking loose. "I am not in the least afraid of that; I have
commanded her six years, and have had many a gale of wind in her; so
that her iron work, which always gives way first, is pretty well
tried. Hold fast! that was an ugly sea; we must lower the yards, I
believe, Archer; the ship is much pressed." "If we attempt it, Sir, we
shall lose them, for a man aloft can do nothing; besides their being
down would ease the ship very little; the mainmast is a sprung mast; I
wish it was overboard without carrying any thing else along with it;
but that can soon be done, the gale cannot last for ever; 'twill soon
be daylight now." Found by the master's watch that it was five
o'clock, though but a little after four by ours; glad it was so near
daylight, and looked for it with much anxiety. Cuba, thou art much in
our way! Another ugly sea: sent a midshipman to bring news from the
pumps: the ship was gaining on them very much, for they had broken one
of their chains, but it was almost mended again. News from the pump
again. "She still gains! a heavy lee!" Back-water from leeward,
half-way up the quarter-deck; filled one of the cutters upon the
booms, and tore her all to pieces; the ship lying almost on her beam
ends, and not attempting to right again. Word from below that the ship
still gained on them, as they could not stand to the pumps, she lay so
much along. I said to Sir Hyde: "This is no time, Sir, to think of
saving the masts, shall we cut the mainmast away?" "Ay! as fast as you
can." I accordingly went into the weather chains with a pole-axe, to
cut away the lanyards; the boatswain went to leeward, and the
carpenters stood by the mast. We were all ready, when a very violent
sea broke right on board of us, carried every thing upon deck away,
filled the ship with water, the main and mizen masts went, the ship
righted, but was in the last struggle of sinking under us.

As soon as we could shake our heads above water, Sir Hyde exclaimed:
"We are gone, at last, Archer! foundered at sea!" "Yes, Sir,
farewell, and the Lord have mercy upon us!" I then turned about to
look forward at the ship; and thought she was struggling to get rid of
some of the water; but all in vain, she was almost full below
"Almighty God! I thank thee, that now I am leaving this world, which I
have always considered as only a passage to a better, I die with a
full hope of the mercies, through the merits of Jesus Christ, thy son,
our Saviour!"

I then felt sorry that I could swim, as by that means I might be a
quarter of an hour longer dying than a man who could not, and it is
impossible to divest ourselves of a wish to preserve life. At the end
of these reflections I thought I heard the ship thump and grinding
under our feet; it was so. "Sir, the ship is ashore!" "What do you
say?" "The ship is ashore, and we may save ourselves yet!" By this
time the quarter-deck was full of men who had come up from below; and
'the Lord have mercy upon us,' flying about from all quarters. The
ship now made every body sensible that she was ashore, for every
stroke threatened a total dissolution of her whole frame; found she
was stern ashore, and the bow broke the sea a good deal, though it was
washing clean over at every stroke. Sir Hyde cried out: "Keep to the
quarter-deck, my lads, when she goes to pieces, 't is your best
chance!" Providentially got the foremast cut away, that she might not
pay round broad-side. Lost five men cutting away the foremast, by the
breaking of a sea on board just as the mast went. That was nothing;
every one expected it would be his own fate next; looked for daybreak
with the greatest impatience. At last it came; but what a scene did it
show us! The ship upon a bed of rocks, mountains of them on one side,
and Cordilleras of water on the other; our poor ship grinding and
crying out at every stroke between them; going away by piecemeal.
However, to show the unaccountable workings of Providence, that which
often appears to be the greatest evil, proved to be the greatest good!
That unmerciful sea lifted and beat us up so high among the rocks,
that at last the ship scarcely moved. She was very strong, and did not
go to pieces at the first thumping, though her decks tumbled in. We
found afterwards that she had beat over a ledge of rocks, almost a
quarter of a mile in extent beyond us, where, if she had struck, every
soul of us must have perished.

I now began to think of getting on shore, so stripped off my coat and
shoes for a swim, and looked for a line to carry the end with me.
Luckily could not find one, which gave me time for recollection.
"This won't do for me, to be the first man out of the ship, and first
lieutenant; we may get to England again, and people may think I paid a
great deal of attention to myself and did not care for any body else.
No, that won't do; instead of being the first, I'll see every man,
sick and well, out of her before me."

I now thought there was no probability of the ship's soon going to
pieces, therefore had not a thought of instant death: took a look
round with a kind of philosophic eye, to see how the same situation
affected my companions, and was surprised to find the most swaggering,
swearing bullies in fine weather, now the most pitiful wretches on
earth, when death appeared before them. However, two got safe; by
which means, with a line, we got a hawser on shore, and made fast to
the rocks, upon which many ventured and arrived safe. There were some
sick and wounded on board, who could not avail themselves of this
method; we, therefore, got a spare top-sail-yard from the chains and
placed one end ashore and the other on the cabin-window, so that most
of the sick got ashore this way.

As I had determined, so I was the last man out of the ship; this was
about ten o'clock. The gale now began to break. Sir Hyde came to me,
and taking me by the hand was so affected that he was scarcely able to
speak "Archer, I am happy beyond expression, to see you on shore, but
look at our poor Phoenix!" I turned about, but could not say a single
word, being too full: my mind had been too intensely occupied before;
but every thing now rushed upon me at once, so that I could not
contain myself, and I indulged for a full quarter of an hour in tears.

By twelve it was pretty moderate; got some nails on shore and made
tents; found great quantities of fish driven up by the sea into the
holes of the rocks; knocked up a fire, and had a most comfortable
dinner. In the afternoon made a stage from the cabin-windows to the
rocks, and got out some provisions and water, lest the ship should go
to pieces, in which case we must all have perished of hunger and
thirst; for we were upon a desolate part of the coast, and under a
rocky mountain, that could not supply us with a single drop of water.

Slept comfortably this night and the next day, the idea of death
vanishing by degrees, the prospect of being prisoners, during the war,
at the Havana, and walking three hundred miles to it through the
woods, was rather unpleasant. However, to save life for the present,
we employed this day in getting more provisions and water on shore,
which was not an easy matter, on account of decks, guns and rubbish,
and ten feet water that lay over them. In the evening I proposed to
Sir Hyde to repair the remains of the only boat left, and to venture
in her to Jamaica myself; and in case I arrived safe, to bring vessels
to take them all off; a proposal worthy of consideration. It was, next
day, agreed to; therefore got the cutter on shore, and set the
carpenters to work on her; in two days she was ready, and at four
o'clock in the afternoon I embarked with four volunteers and a
fortnight's provision, hoisted English colors as we put off from the
shore, and received three cheers from the lads left behind, which we
returned, and set sail with a light heart; having not the least doubt,
that, with God's assistance, we should come and bring them all off.
Had a very squally night, and a very leaky boat, so as to keep two
buckets constantly bailing. Steered her myself the whole night by the
stars, and in the morning saw the coast of Jamaica distant twelve
leagues. At eight in the evening arrived at Montego Bay.

I must now begin to leave off, particularly as I have but half an hour
to conclude; else my pretty little short letter will lose its passage,
which I should not like, after being ten days, at different times,
writing it, beating up with the convoy to the northward, which is a
reason that this epistle will never read well; as I never set down
with a proper disposition to go on with it; but as I knew something of
the kind would please you, I was resolved to finish it; yet it will
not bear an overhaul; so don't expose your son's nonsense.

But to proceed--I instantly sent off an express to the admiral,
another to the Porcupine man of war, and went myself to Martha Bray to
get vessels; for all their vessels here, as well as many of their
houses, were gone to Moco. Got three small vessels, and set out back
again to Cuba, where I arrived the fourth day after leaving my
companions. I thought the ship's crew would have devoured me on my
landing; they presently whisked me up on their shoulders and carried
me to the tent where Sir Hyde was.

I must omit many little occurrences that happened on shore, for want
of time; but I shall have a number of stories to tell when I get
alongside of you; and the next time I visit you I shall not be in such
a hurry to quit you as I was the last, for then I hoped my nest would
have been pretty well feathered:--But my tale is forgotten.

I found the Porcupine had arrived that day, and the lads had built a
boat almost ready for launching, that would hold fifty of them, which
was intended for another trial, in case I had foundered. Next day
embarked all our people that were left, amounting to two hundred and
fifty; for some had died of their wounds they received in getting on
shore; others of drinking rum, and others had straggled into the
country.--All our vessels were so full of people, that we could not
take away the few clothes that were saved from the wreck; but that was
a trifle since we had preserved our lives and liberty. To make short
of my story, we all arrived safe at Montego Bay, and shortly after at
Port Royal, in the Janus, which was sent on purpose for us, and were
all honorably acquitted for the loss of the ship. I was made admiral's
aid-de-camp, and a little time afterwards sent down to St. Juan's as
captain of the Resource, to bring what were left of the poor devils to
Blue Fields, on the Musquito shore, and then to Jamaica, where they
arrived after three month's absence, and without a prize, though I
looked out hard off Porto Bello and Carthagena. Found in my absence
that I had been appointed captain of the Tobago, where I remain his
majesty's most true and faithful servant, and my dear mother's most
dutiful son,

    ----ARCHER

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

AN ACCOUNT OF THE WHALE FISHERY

WITH ANECDOTES OF THE DANGERS ATTENDING IT.


Historians, in general, have given to the Biscayans the credit of
having first practiced the fishery for the Whale; the English, and
afterwards the Dutch are supposed to have followed in the pursuit. It
was prosecuted by the Norwegians so early as the ninth century, and by
the Icelanders about the eleventh. It was not till the seventeenth
century however, that the whale fishery was engaged in by the maritime
nations of Europe as an important branch of commerce.

The crew of a whale ship usually consists of forty to fifty men,
comprising several classes of officers, such as harpooners,
boat-steerers, line-managers, &c. together with fore-mastmen, landmen
and apprentices. As a stimulus to the crew in the fishery, every
individual, from the master down to the boys, besides his monthly pay,
receives either a gratuity for every size fish caught during the
voyage, or a certain sum for every ton of oil which the cargo
produces. Masters and harpooners receive a small sum before sailing,
in place of monthly wages; and if they procure no cargo whatever,
they receive nothing more for their voyage; but in the event of a
successful fishing, their advantages are considerable.

The crow's nest is an apparatus placed on the main-top-mast, or
top-gallant-mast head, as a watch tower for the officer on the
lookout. It is closely defended from the wind and cold, and is
furnished with a speaking trumpet, a telescope and rifle. The most
favorable opportunity for prosecuting the fishery in the Greenland
seas, commonly occurs with north, north-west or west winds. At such
times the sea is smooth, and the atmosphere, though cloudy and dark,
is generally free from fog and snow. The fishers prefer a cloudy to a
clear sky; because in very bright weather, the sea becomes
illuminated, and the shadows of the whale-boats are so deeply
impressed in the water by the beams of the sun that the whales are apt
to take the alarm. Fogs are only so far unfavorable as being liable to
endanger the boats by shutting out the sight of the ship.--A well
constructed whale-boat floats lightly and safely on the water,--is
capable of being rowed with great speed, and readily turned round,--it
is of such capacity that it carries six or seven men, seven or eight
hundred weight of whale-lines, and various other materials, and yet
retains the necessary properties of safety and speed. Whale-boats
being very liable to receive damage, both from whales and ice, are
always carver-built,--a structure which is easily repaired. The
instruments of general use in the capture of the whale, are the
harpoon and lance. There is, moreover, a kind of harpoon which is shot
from a gun, but being difficult to adjust, it is seldom used. Each
boat is likewise furnished with a "jack" or flag fastened to a pole,
intended to be displayed as a signal whenever a whale is harpooned.
The crew of a whale-ship are separated in divisions, equal in number
to the number of the boats. Each division, consisting of a harpooner,
a boat-steerer, and a line-manager, together with three or four
rowers, constitutes a "boats crew."

On fishing stations, when the weather is such as to render the fishery
practicable, the boats are always ready for instant service. The
crow's nest is generally occupied by one of the officers, who keeps an
anxious watch for the appearance of a whale. The moment that a fish is
seen, he gives notice to the "watch upon deck," part of whom leap into
a boat, are lowered down, and push off towards the place. If the fish
be large, a second boat is despatched to the support of the other; and
when the whole of the boats are sent out, the ship is said to have "a
loose fall." There are several rules observed in approaching a whale
to prevent the animal from taking the alarm. As the whale is dull of
hearing, but quick of sight, the boat-steerer always endeavors to get
behind it; and, in accomplishing this, he is sometimes justified in
taking a circuitous rout. In calm weather, where guns are not used,
the greatest caution is necessary before a whale can be reached;
smooth careful rowing is always requisite, and sometimes sculling is
practiced. It is a primary consideration with the harpooner, always to
place his boat as near as possible to the spot in which he expects the
fish to rise, and he conceives himself successful in the attempt when
the fish "comes up within a start," that is, within the distance of
about two hundred yards.

Whenever a whale lies on the surface of the water, unconscious of the
approach of its enemies, the hardy fisher rows directly upon it; and
an instant before the boat touches it, buries his harpoon in his back.
The wounded whale, in the surprise and agony of the moment, makes a
convulsive effort to escape. Then is the moment of danger. The boat is
subjected to the most violent blows from its head, or its fins, but
particularly from its ponderous tail, which sometimes sweeps the air
with such tremendous fury, that boat and men are exposed to one common
destruction.

The head of the whale is avoided, because it cannot be penetrated with
the harpoon; but any part of the body, between the head and the tail,
will admit of the full length of the instrument, without danger of
obstruction. The moment that the wounded whale disappears, a flag is
displayed; on sight of which, those on watch in the ship, give the
alarm, by stamping on the deck, accompanied by shouts of "a fall."--At
the sound of this, the sleeping crew are roused, jump from their beds,
rush upon deck, and crowd into the boats. The alarm of "a fall," has a
singular effect on the feelings of a sleeping person, unaccustomed to
hearing it. It has often been mistaken as a cry of distress. A
landsman, seeing the crew, on an occasion of a fall, leap into the
boats in their shirts, imagined that the ship was sinking. He
therefore tried to get into a boat himself, but every one of them
being fully manned, he was refused. After several fruitless endeavors
to gain a place among his comrades, he cried out, in evident distress,
"What shall I do?--Will none of you take me in?"

The first effort of a "fast-fish," or whale that has been struck, is
to escape from the boat by sinking under water. After this, it
pursues its course downward, or reappears at a little distance, and
swims with great celerity, near the surface of the water. It sometimes
returns instantly to the surface, and gives evidence of its agony by
the most convulsive throes. The downward course of a whale is,
however, the most common. A whale, struck near the edge of any large
sheet of ice, and passing underneath it, will sometimes run the whole
of the lines out of one boat. The approaching distress of a boat, for
want of line, is indicated by the elevation of an oar, to which is
added a second, a third, or even a fourth, in proportion to the nature
of the exigence. The utmost care and attention are requisite, on the
part of every person in the boat, when the lines are running out;
fatal consequences having been sometimes produced by the most trifling
neglect.--When the line happens to "run foul," and cannot be cleared
on the instant, it sometimes draws the boat under water; on which, if
no auxiliary boat, or convenient piece of ice, be at hand, the crew
are plunged into the sea, and are obliged to trust to their oars or
their skill in swimming, for supporting themselves on the surface.

Captain Scoresby relates an accident of this kind, which happened on
his first voyage to the whale fishery. A thousand fathoms of line were
already out, and the fast-boat was forcibly pressed against the side
of a piece of ice. The harpooner, in his anxiety to retard the flight
of the whale, applied too many turns of the line round the bollard,
which, getting entangled, drew the boat beneath the ice. Another boat,
providentially was at hand, into which the crew had just time to
escape. The whale, with near two miles length of line, was, in
consequence of the accident, lost, but the boat was recovered.

The average stay under water of a wounded whale is about thirty
minutes. When it reappears, the assisting boats make for the place
with their utmost speed, and as they reach it, each harpooner plunges
his harpoon into its back, to the amount of three, four, or more,
according to the size of the whale. It is then actively plied with
lances, which are thrust into its body, aiming at its vitals. The sea
to a great extent around is dyed with its blood, and the noise made by
its tail in its dying struggle, may be heard several miles. In dying,
it turns on its back or on its side; which circumstance is announced
by the capturers with the striking of their flags, accompanied with
three lively huzzas!

Whales are sometimes captured, with a single harpoon, in the space of
fifteen minutes. Sometimes they resist forty or fifty hours, and at
times they will break three or four lines at once, or tear themselves
clear off the harpoons, by the violence of their struggles. Generally
the capture of a whale depends on the activity of the harpooner, the
state of the wind and weather, or the peculiar conduct of the animal
itself. Under the most favourable circumstances, the length of time
does not exceed an hour. The general average may be stated at two
hours. Instances have occurred where whales have been taken without
being struck at all, simply by entangling themselves in the lines that
had been used to destroy others, and struggling till they were drowned
or died of exhaustion.

The fishery for whales, when conducted at the margin of those
wonderful sheets of ice, called fields, is, when the weather is fine,
and the refuge for ships secure, the most agreeable, and sometimes the
most productive of all other ways. When the fish can be observed
"blowing" in any of the holes of a field, the men travel over the ice
and attack it with lances to turn it back. As connected with this
subject, Captain Scoresby relates the following circumstance, which
occurred under his own observation.

On the eighth of July, 1813, the ship Esk lay by the edge of a large
sheet of ice, in which there were several thin parts, and some holes.
Here a whale being heard blowing, a harpoon, with a line fastened to
it, was conveyed across the ice, from a boat on guard, and the
harpooner succeeded in striking the whale, at the distance of three
hundred and fifty yards from the verge. It dragged out ten lines,
(2400 yards,) and was supposed to be seen blowing in different holes
in the ice. After some time it made its appearance on the exterior,
and was again struck, at the moment it was about to go under the
second time. About an hundred yards from the edge, it broke the ice
where it was a foot thick, with its head, and respired through the
opening. It then pushed forward, breaking the ice as it advanced, in
spite of the lances constantly directed against it. At last it reached
a kind of basin in the field, where it floated on the surface without
any incumbrance from ice. Its back being fairly exposed, the harpoon
struck from the boat on the outside, was observed to be so slightly
entangled, that it was ready to drop out. Some of the officers
lamented this circumstance, and wished that the harpoon might be
better fast; at the same time observing that if it should slip out,
either the fish would be lost, or they should be under the necessity
of flensing it where it lay, and of dragging the blubber over the ice
to the ship; a kind and degree of labor every one was anxious to
avoid. No sooner was the wish expressed, and its importance explained,
than a young and daring sailor stepped forward, and offered to strike
the harpoon deeper. Not at all intimidated by the surprise manifested
on every countenance at such a bold proposal, he leaped on the back of
the living whale, and cut the harpoon out with his pocket knife.
Stimulated by his gallant example, one of his companions proceeded to
his assistance. While one of them hauled upon the line and held it in
his hands, the other set his shoulder against the end of the harpoon,
and though it was without a stock, contrived to strike it again into
the fish more effectually than at first! The whale was in motion
before they had finished. After they got off its back, it advanced a
considerable distance, breaking the ice all the way, and survived this
novel treatment ten or fifteen minutes. This daring deed was of
essential service. The whale fortunately sunk spontaneously after it
expired; on which it was hauled out under the ice by the line and
secured without farther trouble. It proved a mighty whale; a very
considerable prize.

When engaged in the pursuit of a large whale, it is a necessary
precaution for two boats at all times to proceed in company, that the
one may be able to assist the other, on any emergency. With this
principle in view, two boats from the Esk were sent out in chase of
some large whales, on the 13th of June 1814. No ice was within sight.
The boats had proceeded some time together, when they separated in
pursuit of two whales, not far distant from each other; when, by a
singular coincidence, the harpooners each struck his fish at the same
moment. They were a mile from the ship. Urgent signals for assistance
were displayed by each boat, and in a few minutes one of the
harpooners was obliged to slip the end of his line. Fortunately the
other fish did not descend so deep, and the lines in the boat proved
adequate for the occasion. One of the fish being then supposed to be
lost, five of the boats out of seven attended on the fish which yet
remained entangled, and speedily killed it. A short time afterwards,
the other fish supposed to be lost, was descried at a little distance
from the place where it was struck;--three boats proceeded against
it;--it was immediately struck, and in twenty minutes also killed.
Thus were fortunately captured two whales, both of which had been
despaired of. They produced near forty tons of oil, value, at that
time £1400. The lines attached to the last fish were recovered with
it.

Before a whale can be flensed, as the operation of taking off the fat
and whalebone is called, some preliminary measures are requisite.
These consist in securing the whale to the boat, cutting away the
attached whale-lines, lashing the fins together, and towing it to the
ship. Some curious circumstances connected with these operations may
be mentioned here.

[Illustration]

In the year 1816, a fish was to all appearance killed by the crew of
the Esk. The fins were partly lashed, and the tail on the point of
being secured, and all the lines excepting one, were cut away, the
fish meanwhile lying as if dead. To the alarm, however, of the
sailors, it revived, began to move, and pressed forward in a
convulsive agitation; soon after it sunk in the water to some depth,
and then died. One line fortunately remained attached to it, by which
it was drawn to the surface and secured.

A suspension of labor is generally allowed after the whale has been
secured aside of the ship, and before the commencement of the
operation of flensing. An unlucky circumstance once occurred in an
interval of this kind. At that period of the fishery, (forty or fifty
years ago,) when a single stout whale together with the bounty, was
found sufficient to remunerate the owners of a ship for the expenses
of the voyage, great joy was exhibited on the capture of a whale, by
the fishers. They were not only cheered by a dram of spirits, but
sometimes provided with some favorite "mess," on which to regale
themselves, before they commenced the arduous task of flensing. At
such a period, the crew of an English vessel had captured their first
whale. It was taken to the ship, placed on the lee-side, and though
the wind blew a strong breeze, it was fastened only by a small rope
attached to the fin. In this state of supposed security, all hands
retired to regale themselves, the captain himself not excepted. The
ship being at a distance from any ice, and the fish believed to be
fast, they made no great haste in their enjoyment. At length, the
specksioneer, or chief harpooner, having spent sufficient time in
indulgence and equipment, with an air of importance and
self-confidence, proceeded on deck, and naturally turned to look on
the whale. To his astonishment it was not to be seen. In some alarm he
looked a-stern, a-head, on the other side, but his search was useless;
the ship drifting fast, had pressed forcibly upon the whale, the rope
broke, the fish sunk and was lost. The mortification of this event may
be conceived, but the termination of their vexation will not easily be
imagined, when it is known, that no other opportunity of procuring a
whale occurred during the voyage. The ship returned home clean.

Flensing in a swell is a most difficult and dangerous undertaking; and
when the swell is at all considerable, it is commonly impracticable.
No ropes or blocks are capable of bearing the jerk of the sea. The
harpooners are annoyed by the surge, and repeatedly drenched in water;
and are likewise subject to be wounded by the breaking of ropes or
hooks of tackles, and even by strokes from each other's knives. Hence
accidents in this kind of flensing are not uncommon. The harpooners
not unfrequently fall into the whale's mouth, when it is exposed by
the removal of a surface of blubber; where they might easily be
drowned, but for the prompt assistance which is always at hand.

One of the laws of the fishery universally adhered to, is, that
whenever a whale is loose, whatever may be the case or circumstances,
it becomes a free prize to the first person who gets hold of it. Thus,
when a whale is killed, and the flensing is prevented by a storm, it
is usually taken in tow; if the rope by which it is connected with the
ship should happen to break, and the people of another ship should
seize upon it while disengaged, it becomes their prize. The following
circumstance, which occurred a good many years ago, has a tendency to
illustrate the existing Greenland laws.

During a storm of wind and snow several ships were beating to
windward, under easy sail, along the edge of a pack. When the storm
abated and the weather cleared, the ships steered towards the ice. Two
of the fleet approached it, about a mile assunder, abreast of each
other, when the crews of each ship accidentally got sight of a dead
fish at a little distance, within some loose ice. Each ship now made
sail, to endeavor to reach the fish before the other; which fish being
loose, would be a prize to the first who could get possession of it.
Neither ship could out sail the other, but each contrived to press
forward towards the prize. The little advantage one of them had in
distance, the other compensated with velocity. On each bow of the two
ships, was stationed a principal officer, armed with a harpoon in
readiness to discharge. But it so happened that the ships came in
contact with each other, when within a few yards of the fish, and in
consequence of the shock with which their bows met, they rebounded to
a considerable distance. The officers at the same moment discharged
their harpoons, but all of them fell short of the fish. A hardy fellow
who was second mate of the leeward ship immediately leaped overboard
and with great dexterity swam to the whale, seized it by the fin, and
proclaimed it his prize. It was, however, so swollen, that he was
unable to climb upon it, but was obliged to remain shivering in the
water until assistance should be sent. His captain elated with his
good luck, forgot, or at least neglected his brave second mate; and
before he thought of sending a boat to release him from his
disagreeable situation, prepared to moor his ship to an adjoining
piece of ice. Meanwhile the other ship tacked, and the master himself
stepped into a boat, pushed off and rowed deliberately towards the
dead fish. Observing the trembling seaman still in the water holding
by the fin, he addressed him with, "Well my lad, you have got a fine
fish here,"--to which after a natural reply in the affirmative, he
added, "but don't you find it very cold?"--"Yes," replied the
shivering sailor, "I'm almost starved. I wish you would allow me to
come into your boat until ours arrives." This favor needed no second
solicitation; the boat approached the man and he was assisted into it.
The fish being again loose and out of possession, the captain
instantly struck his harpoon into it, hoisted his flag, and claimed
his prize! Mortified and displeased as the other master felt at this
trick, for so it certainly was, he had nevertheless no redress, but
was obliged to permit the fish to be taken on board of his
competitor's ship, and to content himself with abusing the second mate
for want of discretion, and condemning himself for not having more
compassion on the poor fellow's feeling, which would have prevented
the disagreeable misadventure.

Those employed in the occupation of killing whales, are, when actually
engaged, exposed to danger from three sources, viz. from the ice, from
the climate, and from the whales themselves. The ice is a source of
danger to the fishers, from overhanging masses falling upon
them,--from the approximation of large sheets of ice to each other,
which are apt to crush or upset the boats,--from their boats being
stove or sunk by large masses of ice, agitated by a swell,--and from
the boats being enclosed and beset in a pack of ice, and their crews
thus prevented from joining their ships.

On the commencement of a heavy gale of wind, May 11th, 1813, fourteen
men put off in a boat from the Volunteer of Whitby, with the view of
setting an anchor in a large piece of ice, to which it was their
intention of mooring the ship.--The ship approached on a signal being
made, the sails were clewed up, and a rope fixed to the anchor; but
the ice shivering with the violence of the strain when the ship fell
astern, the anchor flew out and the ship went adrift. The sails being
again set, the ship was reached to the eastward (wind at north,) the
distance of about two miles; but in attempting to wear and return, the
ship, instead of performing the evolution, scudded a considerable
distance to the leeward, and was then reaching out to sea; thus
leaving fourteen of her crew to a fate most dreadful, the fulfilment
of which seemed almost inevitable. The temperature of the air was 15
or 16 of Fahr. when these poor wretches were left upon a detached
piece of ice, of no considerable magnitude, without food, without
shelter from the inclement storm, deprived of every means of refuge
except in a single boat, which, on account of the number of men, and
the violence of the storm, was incapable of conveying them to their
ship. Death stared them in the face whichever way they turned, and a
division in opinion ensued. Some were wishful to remain on the ice,
but the ice could afford them no shelter to the piercing wind, and
would probably be broken to pieces by the increasing swell: others
were anxious to attempt to join their ship while she was yet in
sight, but the force of the wind, the violence of the sea, the
smallness of the boat in comparison to the number of men to be
conveyed, were objections which would have appeared insurmountable to
any person but men in a state of despair.--Judging, that by remaining
on the ice, death was but retarded for a few hours, as the extreme
cold must eventually benumb their faculties, and invite a sleep which
would overcome the remains of animation,--they determined on making
the attempt of rowing to their ship. Poor souls, what must have been
their sensations at that moment,--when the spark of hope yet remaining
was so feeble, that a premature death even to themselves seemed
inevitable. They made the daring experiment, when a few minutes' trial
convinced them, that the attempt was utterly impracticable. They then
with longing eyes, turned their efforts towards recovering the ice
they had left, but their utmost exertions were unavailing. Every one
now viewed his situation as desperate; and anticipated, as certain,
the fatal event which was to put a period to his life. How great must
have been their delight, and how overpowering their sensations, when
at this most critical juncture a ship appeared in sight! She was
advancing directly towards them; their voices were extended and their
flag displayed.--But although it was impossible they should be heard,
it was not impossible they should be seen. Their flag was descried by
the people on board the ship, their mutual courses were so directed as
to form the speediest union, and in a few minutes they found
themselves on the deck of the Lively of Whitby, under circumstances of
safety! They received from their townsmen the warmest congratulations;
and while each individual was forward in contributing his assistance
towards the restoration of their benumbed bodies, each appeared
sensible that their narrow escape from death was highly providential.
The forbearance of God is wonderful. Perhaps these very men a few
hours before, were impiously invoking their own destruction, or
venting imprecations upon their fellow beings! True it is that the
goodness of the Almighty extendeth over all his works, and that while
'Mercy is his darling attribute,'--'Judgment is his strange work.'